Letting Artificial Intelligence in Education Out of the Box: Educational Cobots and Smart Classrooms

This paper proposes that the field of AIED is now mature enough to break away from being delivered mainly through computers and pads so that it can engage with students in new ways and help teachers to teach more effectively. Mostly, the intelligent systems that AIED has delivered so far have used computers and other devices that were essentially designed for businesses or personal use, and not specifically for education. The future holds the promise of creating technologies designed specifically for learning and teaching by combining the power of AIED with advances in the field of robotics and in the increasing use of sensor devices to monitor our surroundings and actions. The paper assumes that “schools” (i.e., a place where children will gather to learn) will still exist in some shape or form in 25 years and that teachers will continue to oversee and promote learning among the students. It proposes that there will be educational cobots assisting teachers in the classrooms of tomorrow and provides examples from current work in robotics. It also envisions smart classrooms that make use of sensors to support learning and illustrates how they might be used in new ways if AIED applications are embedded into them.

A hybrid intelligence-aided approach to affect-sensitive e-learning

E-Learning has revolutionized the delivery of learning through the support of rapid advances in Internet technology. Compared with face-to-face traditional classroom education, e-learning lacks interpersonal and emotional interaction between students and teachers. In other words, although a vital factor in learning that influences a human’s ability to solve problems, affect has been largely ignored in existing e-learning systems. In this study, we propose a hybrid intelligence-aided approach to affect-sensitive e-learning. A system has been developed that incorporates affect recognition and intervention to improve the learner’s learning experience and help the learner become better engaged in the learning process. The system recognizes the learner’s affective states using multimodal information via hybrid intelligent approaches, e.g., head pose, eye gaze tracking, facial expression recognition, physiological signal processing and learning progress tracking. The multimodal information gathered is fused based on the proposed affect learning model. The system provides online interventions and adapts the online learning material to the learner’s current learning state based on pedagogical strategies. Experimental results show that interest and confusion are the most frequently occurring states when a learner interacts with a second language learning system and those states are highly related to learning levels (easy versus difficult) and outcomes. Interventions are effective when a learner is disengaged or bored and have been shown to help learners become more engaged in learning.